The Bible, comprising both the Old and New
Testaments, is the primary religious text
for humanityís largest religion.
It is the number one bestselling book of all
time, having been translated into virtually
every language and distributed to nearly every
culture around the world.
It is consulted daily by millions of people
for inspiration, guidance, comfort and instruction.
Many who revere the Bible believe its writings
to have been inspired by an omniscient, omnipotent
deity, the god of Judaism and Christianity.
The words of the Bible are the words of this
god.
It is without error because the god which
inspired the words of the Bible cannot err.
But, is an inerrant Bible really what we find
when we read its pages?
Is the claim of biblical inerrancy, a text
completely without error regarding all matters
upon which it speaks, scientifically, historically
and theologically, clear and accurate?
Or, when we read the Bible, do we find a text
at odds with expectations created by the assertion
regarding its divine authorship?
God is described by many believers, taking
their clues as to Godís character directly
from the scriptures, as, among other things,
infinite and perfect , unchanging, almighty,
all wise, absolute, working all things according
to His own immutable and most righteous will,
for His own glory, and abundant in truth.
This god has sovereign dominion over his creations,
including human beings, to do by them, for
them, or upon them whatsoever the god pleases.
The deityís knowledge is infinite and infallible
and thus many believers maintain that the
Bible itself, a product of this deity, is
likewise without error.
The Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy,
formulated in October 1978 by more than 200
evangelical leaders, declares on behalf of
a large number of believers: ìHoly Scripture,
being God's own Word, written by men prepared
and superintended by His Spirit, is of infallible
divine authority in all matters upon which
it touches: it is to be believed, as God's
instruction, in all that it affirms, obeyed,
as God's command, in all that it requires;
embraced, as God's pledge, in all that it
promises.î Furthermore, ìBeing wholly and
verbally God-given, Scripture is without error
or fault in all its teaching, no less in what
it states about God's acts in creation, about
the events of world history, and about its
own literary origins under GodÖî This Protestant
affirmation of the Bibleís inerrant nature
is reflected in Catholicism.
The Catholic Church also states, the ìÖholy
mother Church, relying on the belief of the
Apostles, holds that the books of both the
Old and New Testaments in their entirety,
with all their parts, are sacred and canonical
because written under the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, they have God as their author
and have been handed on as such to the Church
herself.î Furthermore, ìIn composing the
sacred books, God chose men and while employed
by Him they made use of their powers and abilities,
so that with Him acting in them and through
them, they, as true authors, consigned to
writing everything and only those things which
He wanted.
Therefore, since everything asserted by the
inspired authors or sacred writers must be
held to be asserted by the Holy Spirit, it
follows that the books of Scripture must be
acknowledged as teaching solidly, faithfully
and without error that truth which God wanted
put into sacred writingsÖî
The conclusion about the inerrancy of the
Bible across Christendom seems self-evident
if the nature of the god which is believed
to have inspired the writing of the Scriptures
is accepted.
If God is all-powerful, all-knowing, incapable
of error, committed to the truth in all matters,
then surely his book ñthe only words this
deity bothered to have put into printóis
equally without error.
The divine inspiration of the Bible is foundational
to the belief that it is without error ìin
all matters that it touches.î It is the nature
of god as an omniscient, omnipotent and infallible
character himself which drives the faith of
those who profess biblical inerrancy.
Inspiration means that the diverse authors
who composed the various texts of the Bible
were each given direct divine knowledge about
God, creation, human history, the future,
and any other topic on which they wrote.
The authors were given a knowledge that they
could not have had outside divine inspiration.
The deityís inspiration affected the will,
the intelligence and all the executive faculties
of the writer.
And while inspiration did not render the authors
as merely instruments which moved pen and
turned pages for god, their own personality
and experiences were allowed to come through
in what they wrote, nonetheless they wrote
exactly what came from the mind of God, recorded
without error.
The Bible is also thought of as a manifestation
of God; a God who is perfect and without blemish.
In the Old Testament God is revealed personally
to various individuals.
Adam, Abraham, and Moses are all said to have
spoken with God.
When Moses returned from Mount Sinai with
the stone tablets bearing the 10 commandments,
his very skin and hair shone because he had
been talking to God.
God is also believed to have come in the flesh,
in the person of Jesus, and as such was a
perfect, sinless human being.
The Bible, a manifestation of God in the written
word, is itself perfect and without error
as were his other manifestations.
Belief in the divine inspiration of the Bible
and biblical inerrancy has a long history.
Augustine, one of the early Church theologians,
declared:
ìOf [the canonical books of Scripture] alone
do I most firmly believe that their authors
were completely free from error.
And if in these writings I am perplexed by
anything which appears to me opposed to the
truth, I do not hesitate to suppose that either
the manuscript is faulty, or the translator
has not caught the meaning of what was said,
or I myself have failed to understand it...î
Echoing this belief in the Middle Ages, Anselm
wrote,
ëFor I am sure that if I say anything which
is undoubtedly contradictory to holy Scripture,
it is wrong; and if I become aware of such
a contradiction, I do not wish to hold to
that opinion.í
And, similarly, Thomas Aquinas affirmed, ëIt
is plain that nothing false can ever underlie
the literal sense of Holy Scripture.í For
Aquinas the Word of God, the Bible, never
errs but is instead ëinfallible truthí
And this belief in the inerrancy of the Bible
held through the Reformation as well.
Martin Luther asserted that not only had the
Scriptures ìnever erred,î they ìcannot
err.î The reasons Luther gave were many,
but mainly, he believed, the Bible was the
very mouth of God and God cannot lie.
So, if God inspired authors to write the words
of the Bible, the authors themselves could
not have erred, thus the Bible is inerrant.
John Calvin, too, maintained inerrancy of
the biblical texts.
For Calvin, the Bible was ìthe eternal and
inviolable truth of God.î
The character of God as explained by those
who believe in him, and the claim of inerrancy
of the biblical text which this god caused
to be produced, create a sort of hypothesis
which can be checked for validity.
If such a god exists, and he is responsible
for the inspiration of a text without error,
what might we expect ñor not expectóto find
in the pages of this document?
Should there be an expectation not to encounter
conflict between what the Bible records as
Godís activity in the creation of the universe,
the solar system, planet earth and life upon
it and what modern science has discovered?
Should there be an expectation to find a historically
accurate account of how the nation of Israel
came to occupy the land upon which their nation
was built?
Do the discoveries of archaeology support
these stories?
What if the Bible has stories most readers
would consider better suited for children
including things like magically talking animals,
people made of sand or salt and magicians
doing all sorts of fantastic tricks?
Would such stories conform to, or be at odds
with expectations for the Bibleís content
based upon what has been said about the nature
of the Bibleís authorship and divine inspiration?
Consider a leisurely walk across a field.
In crossing the field, suppose a person comes
across a stone and then wonders how the stone
came to be in the field.
They might answer that the stone arrived there
after millions of years under the earthís
surface, having been subjected to enormous
geological events.
Certainly the person would not conclude that
this stone was somehow unique in the sense
of its origins.
It wasnít constructed in a factory and shipped
to its current location in the field.
The stone is like many others the hiker has
discovered on walks in many different fields.
It is not exactly the same as other rocks,
but it is unmistakably a rock.
But suppose this person finds instead a watch
in the field.
Would this person, given what is told of watchmakers
and watches, conclude that it, too, was the
product of natural forces?
A watch is distinct from stones because it
has within it the clues of an intelligent
designer.
It sits apart from the multitude of stones
scattered upon the ground and meets the expectations
of someone familiar with watchmakers who comprehended
the watchís construction and designed its
use.
It isnít a stone which bears its own marks
of origin.
It is a watch which origins are with a watchmaker.
But before opening the cover of the Bible,
many who promote belief in the divine inspiration
of its books say expectations CANNOT be brought
to a reading of the biblical texts the way
a person uses knowledge of watches to conclude
that a watch was manufactured by a watchmaker.
How can anyone predict what god can or will
do, they ask?
Why would god fulfill human expectations?
Itís not that anyone is asking this god to
perform a certain way IN ORDER to fulfill
certain expectations.
Thatís backwards.
The expectations brought to a reading of the
Bible were created by the definition of what
and who God is, and that the Bible inspired
by this deity is without error.
Just as there is an expectation for watchmakers
to make watches and not stones, descriptions
of Godís nature as an all-knowing, all-powerful
being and his involvement with the creation
of an inerrant biblical text create an expectation
that the Bible really be without error and
not riddled with problems.
It is impossible to approach the Bible neutrally
if it is provisionally granted that there
is a god, and that this god is all-knowing,
all-powerful, incapable of producing error
and is ultimately responsible for what was
recorded in the pages of the Bible.
Expecting to find inerrancy, some readers
are disappointed by what they find when reading
the Bible.
Far from an inerrant document, some readers
are faced from the very first pages with errors
of scientific fact, historical incongruities
and archaic, difficult passages.
It doesnít seem at all like the work of an
omniscient, omnipotent deity.
What is it that some readers find in these
supposedly sacred scriptures which have turned
them not into Bible Believers, but Bible Skeptics?
While the claim is that the Bible was authored
by an omnipotent, omniscient God and, as a
result, is without error, historically, scientifically,
and in every other conceivable way, actually
opening the cover the Bible and reading it
reveals a great number of problems which give
rise to doubts about its supposed divine authorship.
For example,
Internal Contradictions
How many officers did Solomon employ for the
construction of his famous Temple?
Was it 3,300 as stated in 1 Kings 5:16 or
3,600 as recorded in 2 Chronicles 2:2?
Who purchased the field with the money given
to Judas for his betrayal of Jesus?
Did Judas himself buy the field as reported
in Acts 1:18?
Or did the chief priests pick up the money
that Judas threw at their feet and use it
to buy the field as given in Matthew 27:6-7?
Absurdities
Occasionally, the Bible reads more like a
childrenís story than it does a sober record
of human history and Godís interaction with
humankind.
Many readers have problems taking the Bible
seriously when they read within the first
few pages of the book a story about a talking
snake.
A little further and readers encounter a talking
donkey and then a talking bush.
Historical Errors
The biblical story of the Hebrew escape from
Egyptian bondage is fraught with numerous
historical errors and absurdities not the
least of which is the number of people leaving
under Mosesís leadership.
The Bible reports that 600,000 men of military
age ñupwards of 20 years of ageñleft Egypt
in the exodus.
If women of the same age, children and the
elderly are figured in, the population of
Hebrews leaving northern Egypt numbered nearly
2 Ω million; virtually the entire population
of Egypt at the time according to historical
research!
And this population supposedly grew from a
scant 70 persons in a mere 400 years!
The biblical tale of the fall of Jericho also
offers historical errors.
Depending on the dates given by interpreters
of the text for the exodus from Egypt and
the subsequent conquest of Canaan, archaeological
research has discovered the city of Jericho
either did not have a wall for the Hebrew
army to topple or it was not populated at
all!
Scientific Errors
From the first chapter of the Bible, readers
encounter a story of creation that is wrong
in nearly every assertion it makes about the
formation of the universe, our galaxy, solar
system, earth and the life upon it.
The story mentions the creation of a solid
canopy that acts as our sky, a barrier separating
waters below the dome ñthe rivers, lakes
and seasófrom a vast collection of water
above it.
The entire creative process is said, not to
have covered billions of years, but instead
a mere six days.
The Bible tells the story of a worldwide flood.
In the tale, all life except those aboard
a large ark is snuffed out in a global deluge.
And yet, no evidence exists in the geological
record to support such a fantastic story.
Failed prophecies and Questionable Ethics
Readers of the biblical text also encounter
failed prophecies.
For example, Ezekiel 29 states that Egypt
in the not-to-distant future of the writing
of the text ñsometime in the 6th century
BCE and heavily edited thereafterówould become
so desolate that no foot would walk across
its cursed soil.
And yet, Egypt is one of the longest continuously
inhabited nations in the world.
Problems also arise when readers encounter
questionable ethics in some of the biblical
tales.
When a bunch of rowdy boys outside the city
of Bethel in 2 Kings fail to show proper respect
toward a prophet of the god Yahweh, teasing
the man for having a bald head, the prophet
calls down a curse upon the children and God
obliges, sending two she bears out of the
nearby woods to tear the boys limb from limb.
Surely an all-loving God wouldnít participate
in such an abhorrent actionÖwould he?
Any and most of these problems with the biblical
text exist in all human literature, from ancient
Greek myths to a randomly selected Stephen
King novel, and when encountered in these
other forms most readers think nothing of
them.
So why is the Bible held to a higher standard?
Might that be considered unfair?
The Bible is held to a higher standard not
because readers are unnecessarily critical
or prejudiced, but precisely because the expectations
for the biblical text created by the assertions
regarding its divine origins and claims of
inerrancy made by its adherents have themselves
created this higher standard.
Watchmakers are expected to make watches;
expert watchmakers are expected to make expert
watches.
The Bible, so its advocates state, is NOT
just another ancient book of myths and religio-political
propagandistic exaggerations or a dime store
novel.
It is the inerrant, unchanging, sacred Word
of God.
But if the Bible was divinely inspired, its
inspiration was clumsy and unconcerned with
the readerís understanding or comprehension
of the text.
Faced with the reality of contradictions,
absurdities, historical and scientific errors,
failed prophecies and questionable ethics
found in the biblical text, how DO advocates
of perfect, divine inspiration maintain belief
in the Bible as a holy book?
They do so by employing apologetics.
And the ones who engage in apologetics are
known asÖapologists.
Given the sheer number of problems with the
biblical text, the apologists certainly have
their work cut out for them.
But theyíve had centuries to refine their
craft and design arguments to answer the skeptics.
How good are those arguments?
Apologetics, specifically biblical apologetics,
are concerned with the defense of the Bible
as the inerrant and supernaturally inspired
Word of God.
The word Apologetics comes from the Greek,
apologia, meaning "defensible," and takes
its lead from the Bible itself.
1 Peter 3:15 states, But sanctify the Lord
God in your hearts: and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asketh you
a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness
and fear.
Meekness and fear arenít always found in
apologetics, as defense of the Bible is a
contentious and highly personal affair.
Challenges to the Bibleís authority as Godís
Word is a challenge to a personís worldview
and sense of values.
Biblical apologetics respond to objections
raised by those skeptical of the claim of
divine authorship and inerrancy in a way which
attempts, at least ideally, to establish the
objective truth of biblical inerrancy and
the exclusivity of the Bible as a divinely
inspired collection of literature.
All apologists work under an agenda which
includes belief in the scriptures as god given
and with a particular religious view in mind.
The Bible supplies, for them, instruction
and direction which guides their lives and
they see skepticism as an attack on their
worldview.
If their worldview is rendered false by such
criticism, apologists may fear a loss of hope,
direction or purpose for their lives.
For some, it may also mean a loss of income.
Because they have invested belief in the Bible
and its claims, they are driven by the command
in 1 Peter to defend these views.
And defend them they do, at whatever cost.
If the claims of the apologists are true,
and the Bible was authored by a divine being
with absolute knowledge and power, why are
apologetics even necessary?
The fact that apologetics exist itself undermines
the very claims of divine authorship of the
Bible and inerrancy.
If the Bible needs defense, it is precisely
because it is not clear in what it states
which requires clarification, is in error
over matters of history and science which
need repair, and raises questions of authenticity,
morality, and accuracy which beg for answers.
Can and would a perfect god with the character
of infinite and perfect knowledge, all wise,
and abundant in truth be able to author or
inspire a work which is not clear in what
it states, is in error over matters of history
and science, and raises questions of authenticity,
morality, and accuracy?
If such issues are found in the Bible and
require human intervention to explain them
away, the Bible seems much less a work of
divine influence.
Apologetics seem to admit that the Bible does
have numerous faults and cannot be trusted
to be read alone.
God may have chosen the very words of scripture
but he did so poorly and requires the intervention
of the apologist.
The apologist then must edit, augment, alter
and put correct what they believe God really
meant to say!
The problem of apologetics is exacerbated
by the fact that rarely does there exist a
single apologetic for any given problem found
in the Bible.
One apologist admits, ìIn some casesÖthere
are two or more separate comments on similar
Bible passagesÖThis is due to the multiple
[apologists commenting on the same passage]
and the fact that [apologists] do not always
agree on the best solution to certain difficulties.î
For this apologist, they assert it is actually
a good thing to have ìa variety of solutionsî
to biblical problems so that those seeking
clarification of difficult biblical passages
will then be ìable to think through for themselves
which solutions best satisfy their questions.î
But if two opposing apologetics exist for
a single problem found in the Bible, how is
anyone to decide which apologetic solution
is the correct one?
Is it really simply a matter of personal choice?
Is interpreting the Bible a democratic affair
where the majority rules?
And why would a perfect god inspire a Bible
which produces such a quagmire of apologetics?
Was the flood of Noah a local affair, or global
in scope?
The answer varies by apologist.
Do the mismatched numbers of Solomonís officers
in 1 Kings and 2 Chronicles reflect one author
including reserve officers or different standards
in officer rankings?
That will again vary by apologist.
The fact that various contradictory apologetics
exist for problems uncovered in the biblical
text is evidence that apologists cannot agree
on how to interpret the Bible.
They only thing that can agree on is that
a plain reading of the narrative is itself
absurd and in need of explanation.
Each apologist operates under a personal religiously
driven agenda to remove obvious and embarrassing
problems from the Bible.
Apologists are nothing if not inventive in
their efforts to interpret the Bible for their
own specific purposes.
Faced with the reality of competing apologetics,
the apologist may argue that they are but
mere mortals.
Apologists are bound to make mistakes.
If there are conflicting interpretations of
biblical passages, the fault is not in the
Bible but in the all-too-human, all-too-fallible
apologist.
But if the fault were not in the scriptures
themselves, why then did the text produce
conditions which gave rise to apologetics
in the first place?
The very fact that the Bible is not clear,
is not infallible, is the reason apologists
exist at all.
And yet, they produce as muddled, as fallible
explanations for the Bible as the Bible does
with a straight reading.
Some apologists, however, see themselves as,
in a modern sense, fulfilling the role of
an Old Testament prophet; speaking and interpreting,
correctly of course, the Word of God.
They acknowledge competing apologetics but
reject them, if they do not agree with their
own, as misguided at best, demonic attempts
to confuse the faithful at worst.
In other words, while the Bible may appear
to be fallible, these apologists are not!
Such arrogance, however, doesnít negate the
fact that competing apologetics nonetheless
exist and each is supported by its inventor
as the true interpretation of the text.
Again, the fact that the text needs to be
explained by any mortal should give one doubts
as to its divine nature.
So, who are we to believe?
A Catholic apologist?
An Evangelical Protestant apologist?
A Liberal Christian Apologist?
A Mormon apologist?
Or should we let the Bible speak for itself?
For the believer in the divine inspiration
and infallibility of the biblical text, this
is no small matter.
But even for the skeptic the choice is important.
Does one hand over the interpretation of the
Bible to an apologist who clearly has an agenda
and a vested interest in how those texts are
understood?
One should exercise great caution when encountering
apologists.
What drives them to interpret the text the
way they do?
What tools do they bring to an understanding
of the text and how are those tools being
used?
Do apologists allow the sciences to help them
interpret the text?
Do they consult with the social sciences?
With cultural anthropological studies?
With geology?
Astronomy?
Biology?
Linguistics?
Archaeology?
Do they represent these fields fairly?
Or does the apologist merely employ such fields
of studies to support a specific agenda, manipulating
the data so that a desired outcome is achieved?
Even when the Bible is clearly in error, do
the apologists acknowledge this error, or
craftily spin another magical tale to make
the Bible say what they want it to, creating
the illusion of inerrancy at the Bibleís
own expense?
Many apologists have tried to explain the
existence of errors found in the Bible by
claiming there were no errors in the ORIGINAL
manuscripts, even though some errors may have
crept in over time.
What they mean is that the originally penned
versions of each of the Bibleís books were
completely without error but that, over the
centuries, men who copied these books introduced
minor mistakes into the text.
But what gives apologists reason to assume
this original version of the Bible was itself
inerrant other than their belief that it was?
No original Bible exists to check for inerrancy!
And apologists canít explain why the original
version of the Bible was without error but
that subsequent copies contain them.
It simply makes no logical sense.
If human error was not allowed to mar the
perfect originals of Godís script, why was
it allowed to deface the copies?
Some apologists may appeal to a different
set of ìoriginalsî than the ones produced
by the authors of the first scrolls.
Such an apologist may refer to the originals
as pre-existent and currently existingÖin
the heavenly realm.
This set of ìoriginalsî would indeed be
without error and remain so because they are
with God in some sort of ethereal sense.
Of course, making such an appeal is as equally
without evidence as claiming the first earthly
copies of the Bible were without error, but
it also puts any chance of verifying the assertion
completely out of reach.
The claim is on par with other fantastical
stories like Joseph Smithís mysterious Golden
Plates or the New Ageís Akashic Records.
The Bible then becomes some sort of fourth-wheel
in the Christian Trinity ñGod, the Father,
God, the Son, God, the Holy Spirit, and God,
the Bible.
For the True Believer, one not interested
in actual evidence or factual claims, making
the only inerrant copies of the Bible as mysterious
and out of reach as the God which inspired
them is extremely comforting.
The assertion cannot be proved, but it can
be disproven either.
As such, however, it is completely useless
to one not already convinced of the Bibleís
inerrancy and divine inspiration.
An original inerrant Bible is exactly what
one would expect were the Bible inspired by
an omniscient, omnipotent God and just such
an inerrant original is what is claimed to
have existed by biblical apologists.
However, if a god were interested in inspiring
an inerrant original Bible it follows that
this god would be as equally interested in
assuring inerrant copies of the text.
But this is not what is found.
Errant copies are, however, what would be
expected for texts not under divine stewardship.
Without an original Bible to verify the claim
of inerrancy, the only Bibles currently available
for examination are the errant copies.
Errant copies, then, evidence not divine authorship
or inspiration, but an all-too fallible human
production.
Deferring to an inaccessible original version
of the Bible does not help support the claim
of biblical inerrancy.
While going through the biblical text, readers
cannot help but notice strange descriptions
of natural phenomena which are at variance
with modern scientific understandings of our
world.
Referring to the sky as a solid dome, for
example, or to the sun as moving over the
earth as a runner runs a race, is unexpected
if these texts were authored by an omniscient
being who mustíve known the sky was a permeable
atmosphere and that the sun was stationary
in relation to the earth.
Such ìlanguage of appearanceî is known as
phenomenological language and is, in and of
itself, not in error strictly speaking.
From a human perspective, the sky does appear
as a dome covering overhead and the sun does
appear to move across the sky ñas opposed
to the observer moving beneath the sun.
Apologists assert that God allowed such phenomenological
language to be used in the biblical text becauseÖwell,
there never really is a reason given for why
God allowed such language to be used in the
Bible other than the self-affirming reason
that God allowed it!
Some apologists will point out that even today
people who know better, like weather forecasters
on TV, use phenomenological language like
ìsunriseî and ìsunset.î Are we to assume
scientific inaccuracy when the TV forecaster
uses such words and phrases?
Yes.
Because the sun does not rise and the sun
does not set.
These are terms of convenience and are in
our language largely because they exist in
such ancient, scientifically ignorant literature
like the Bible.
If people knew, 3000 years ago, that the sun
does not really rise and set but that the
earth turns underneath it, they might have
invented different words to describe the phenomena.
This seems especially true for those inspired
by an omniscient god.
It certainly is not absurd to expect that
the Hebrew authors of the Bible would have
invented new words to describe what God inspired
them to write if phenomenological language
would cause future confusion or doubt over
the divine inspiration of the text.
Was the Bible only inspired so the Hebrews
alone could easily understand it?
The Hebrews are described as the only tribe
of humans whom God favored with his presence
and his knowledge.
To evidence this special designation, it certainly
would have been helpful if this God had inspired
unique and scientifically accurate descriptions
of natural phenomena instead of merely allowing
the Hebrews to blend in with their less-favored
neighbors, merely describing things the way
everyone else was doing at the time.
But the Bible, the apologists say, is not
a science textbook.
It neednít have been so precise that it ignores
the plain speaking and observations of the
human beings writing it.
The authors were allowed to write things from
their perspective, not from the perspective
of God.
However, the same is true of every other,
non-divinely-inspired ancient (and even many
modern) documents.
If the biblical text was allowed to reflect
the inaccurate perspective of human beings
ñand not that of Godís overarching perspective--
how can the apologistóor anyone!-- tell the
difference between a biblical author writing
something phenomenologically because he simply
didnít know any better and a biblical author
writing something phenomenologically because
God allowed him to do so during divine inspiration?
The text, written either way, would look identical
so the appeal to phenomenological language
as something God simply allowed to happen
but was nonetheless responsible for during
the process of divine inspiration is an empty,
unsupported and self-serving assertion.
How can we know when God allowed, under divine
inspiration, an author to use phenomenological
language, the apologist may be asked?
When the author used phenomenological language,
will come the reply.
The assertion gets us nowhere.
The use of phenomenological language certainly
doesnít support the claim of divine inspiration
or biblical inerrancy.
How does one distinguish between the divine
inspiration of phenomenological language when
its use is perfectly natural for un-inspired
works of literature?
Some apologists will argue that what looks
on the surface to be errors of scientific
fact found in the Bible, are instead instances
of the use of equivocal language.
Matters which were simply too complicated
for the biblical authors to comprehend, but
not for the creator of the universe to understand,
were inspired to be written in equivocal language
so that the ancient writers could get as close
to the truth without having to actually face
it head on.
Terms were inspired to be left undefined and
vague for the ancient audience until future
minds encountered the text with sufficiently
advanced knowledge to understand what God
was really trying to say.
So, for example, the description of the sky
in Genesis 1 gives the impression of a solid,
domed canopy which rests above the earth,
separating the seas, rivers and lakes below
the canopy from a vast, extraterrestrial reserve
of water above.
And God made the firmament, and divided the
waters which [were] under the firmament from
the waters which [were] above the firmament:
and it was so.
And God called the firmament Heaven.
However, according to the apologist who invokes
the inspiration of equivocal language the
Hebrew term raqiya, used in the biblical text
to name the sky dome and which has its etymological
roots in objects which are solid, like tin
or gold, and hammered or stretched out to
cover another object, is actually equivocal
enough to allow for a later audience, educated
in the discoveries of modern science, to understand
the term to really be referring to a permeable,
multi-layered atmosphere or even to outer
space itself!
What such an apologetic assumes, of course,
is that the ancient authors and their audience
were too unintelligent or naÔve to understand
the reality of Godís revelation and so he
condescended to them, like children, tucking
a deeper meaning into the text that these
more simple-minded people apparently couldnít
possibly comprehend.
However, it is not at all true that the ancients
had less intellectual capacity than do modern
humans.
Itís simply a fact of history that they didnít
have access to the knowledge that we have
today.
It is not the case that ancient people were
too mentally challenged to grasp and comprehend
more complicated ideas.
Certainly they had as much intelligence to
understand and articulate accurately basic
scientific facts as can most high school students
today.
The apologist insults these ancient authors
by treating them as a sort of sub-species
of human, without the intelligence to understand
the basic science of the 21st century.
But this simply is not true.
While the ancients may have never seen a modern
automobile, they certainly had the mental
capacity to be taught the basics about the
vehicle and, more, how to drive one.
Additionally, if God had inspired the texts
in language merely appropriate for a more
naÔve people, with the proper anticipation
such an omniscient being would possess for
a more intellectually sophisticated audience
in the future, why do we not find clear markers
in the Bible to such an affect?
In other words, why do we not find such phrases
as ìThis is written not as it is, but only
so that you will understandî or some other
such marker in the text?
These phrases would certainly give evidence
to support the apologistís assertion that
certain words or ideas were inspired to be
equivocal in the text for ancient audiences
in anticipation of future readers with the
intellectual capacity to understand Godís
greater meaning.
Lacking such phrases the apologistís assertion
looks rather vacant.
Apologists are right about one thing, however.
Equivocal language does exist in the biblical
text.
But it exists not because it was inspired
to be there.
Vague and undefined terms are used because
the authors themselves did not have a clear
and precise understanding of the nature of
reality.
They were driven, not by a lack of intellectual
capacity, but merely by scientific ignorance.
When the sky, for example, was given a descriptive
name which evoked an image of a solid dome,
stretched to cover the earth like an overturned
tea-cup, it was because the ancient authors
clearly thought this was the nature of reality.
The use of equivocal language was not done
for a later generationís benefit, for modern
apologists to stuff their own meaning into
the text.
Literature produced purely under the limitations
of human knowledge certainly would use equivocal
language when writers did not understand the
deeper nature of a scientific reality, when
knowledge was guided by superstition, myths
and legends.
However, equivocal language is not something
one would expect to find in a text inspired
by an omniscient deity.
As one apologetic source puts it: ìFalse
religious systems often use equivocation to
twist scripture to make it say what they want
it to say.î But not only the so-called false
religious systems, but even biblical apologists
use this technique.
A number of apologists attempt to remove problems
found in the Bible by redefining words.
Many words in the Bible have multiple meanings.
For example, the Hebrew ìnaíarî can mean
ìa boy,î ìa youth,î ìa young man,î or
even more broadly, ìchildren.î Most of the
time, words with multiple meanings can be
understood in the context in which they are
found, and often by helping words.
So, for example, ìboyî is clearly the definition
of naíar in the story of Elisha and the Bears
in 2 Kings.
Here, ìnaíarî is defined by being paired
with another word, ìqatan.î ìQatanî can
mean ìyoung,î ìsmall,î or ìinsignificant.î
When qualifying ìnaíar,î however, qatan
always means ìsmallî as in ìyoungî and
so the qatan naíar in the story of Elisha
are ìlittle boysî or ìyoung children.î
However, the apologist who is embarrassed
by the story of Elishaís curse in 2 Kings,
in which God sends two bears to maul the qatan
naíar, the little boys or young children,
because of an insult they leveled against
Godís prophet, is motivated to change the
meaning of qatan and naíar so that the story
is no longer as horrific for modern ears.
The apologist removes the words from their
context of 2 Kings and imposes upon them alternate
but improbable definitions in order to rewrite
the tale.
So, for example, ìnaíarî is said to indicate
an older male instead of a boy or child, and
ìqatanî is defined as ìinsignificant.î
In the hands of the apologist, the term ìqatan
naíarî no longer means ìlittle boyî or
ìyoung childrenî as the context of 2 Kings
clearly implies, but ìinsignificant male.î
The little boys in the story of 2 Kings are
then transformed into a marauding band of
homeless, dangerous highwayman in the throes
of the apologetic frenzy so that the curse
from Elisha and the ensuing bear attack become
a reasonable and palatable outcome for such
a vicious gang of outlaws.
There certainly is nothing wrong with assigning
the proper definitions to difficult words
or phrases in the biblical text.
The problem with this approach comes when
the goal is not to educate the reader but
to obscure a Bible difficulty, cover up an
embarrassing passage, and promote a specific
apologetic agenda.
Difficult passages in the Bible, even those
which appear to be in historical or scientific
error, are claimed by some apologists to have
been woven into the text through inspiration
of God in order to persuade readers to become
more attentive and engaged with the text.
Difficult passages in the Bible, especially
those which reflect an alien time and culture,
cause readers to spend more time studying
the scriptures to grasp their meaning which
has a therapeutic effect, some apologists
will assert.
The Greek word for disciple used in the New
Testament literally means ìpupilî or ìlearnerî
and those who freely choose to immerse themselves
in a deep study of the Bible mark themselves
as true disciples of God.
God certainly isnít interested in coercing
people to come to belief in him by inspiring
a clear and accurate text.
But how is having the best available evidence
for the existence of God and his inspiration
of the biblical text--a text clear and unambiguous--
considered coercion?
In the sense some biblical apologetics may
be using the word, coercion can be defined
as ìcompelling to an act or choice.î Using
this definition, perhaps a clear and unambiguous
biblical text could be considered a form of
mild coercion into belief in GodÖbut how
can that be considered a bad thing by biblical
apologists and Christian theists?
Isnít this exactly the goal they have in
mind?
Isnít the practice of apologetics itself
a form of coercion if it clears confusion
about the text and offers evidence for Godís
inspiration of the narratives and his existence?
How is making the text clear through apologetics
not coercion but a clear text from divine
inspiration is?
It isnít that thereís a request for God
to write his text across the sky, on the moon,
in rock formations on Mars or to ìzapî perfect
personal understanding of the Bible into everyoneís
heads.
A science textbook, for example, may be difficult
to comprehend because of the subject matter,
but the authors of such texts strive to write
them as clearly and as free from error as
humanly possible.
Certainly they are not trying to coerce anyone
into learning from their textbooks but merely
making the subject matter as accessible and
understandable to as many readers as possible.
Translators, too, will work extremely hard
to translate texts from one language into
another so that the meaning of the original
text is retained in the copies.
Humans work on their own literature to these
degrees when the text is important enough
to warrant such pain-staking precision and
often achieve remarkable results.
Students read their texts and understand the
subject matter without encountering unnecessarily
cumbersome chapters or obvious errors of fact.
And this is accomplished solely through human
effort.
So the question is: why isnít the divinely
inspired book of an omniscient, omnipotent
God similarly as accessible as supernaturally
possible?
Even though it might be expected that a book
authored by an omniscient being should be
easier to understand and not require advanced
degrees in multiple languages, the social
sciences, archaeology and the like, the fact
is the Bible does require its readers to dig
down deeper than what is plainly on the surface
of the text.
And this is to be expected, not from a book
authored by an all-powerful God, but one authored
by very real, very earth-bound people who
didnít have the advantage of omniscience,
who were not careful to understand their words
would carry across centuries to people of
other places and other times, but instead
were prisoners of their own time and place,
their own culture, unable to break free of
these constraints precisely because they were
not liberated by a powerful deity inspiring
a timeless document intended for all humankind.
The Bible shows all the features of literature
produced out of specific ages and cultures
and thus must be approached as such, without
the expectations of divine inspiration forced
upon it by its apologists.
But beyond the failure of the text to meet
the simple expectation of clarity if it were
indeed inspired by an omniscient, omnipotent
being, objective study of the Bible often
has the opposite effect of what the apologists
intend.
Many who read the Bible and study it in depth
come to the conclusion that the scriptures
certainly are NOT inerrant and in fact are
far from what one would expect from a document
inspired by a timeless deity.
To be sure, such a study helps place the Bible
in its historical context.
Understanding the political, social and religious
structures out of which the Bible was produced
helps explain some of the peculiarities of
the text.
However, apologists who claim a more rigorous
study of the Bible leads one to a better understanding
of the Bible as Godís inerrant Word start
with that conclusion already in mind and then
tailor their ìstudyî to conform to this
belief.
If a student is not willing to go where studies
lead, and is only interested in gathering
carefully selected data to support a preconceived
conclusion ñnamely that the Bible is the
inerrant word of Godóthen why bother being
a student of the text at all?
Such a person might as well simply announce,
ìGod said it, I believe it, that settles
itî and not waste time with the pretense
of being a student of the biblical text.
Some apologists note that to have a truly
inerrant copy of the Bible in todayís world
would create enormous logistical problems
for God.
Each of these problems has to do with the
transmission of Godís inerrant Word as given
in the Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek of the originals
into the variety of human language alive in
the world today.
According to virtually every apologist for
the inerrancy of the biblical text, the original
scrolls and parchments of the biblical books
were inspired inerrant.
However, they say, errors can be misunderstood
to exist in the text due to translation.
Because every language has its own unique
idioms, archaic terminology, puns, euphemisms,
and other forms of speech, these often do
not translate well into other languages and
thus, certain sections of the Bible can seem
confusing.
Problems can arise from translating these
unique forms of speech into modern languages
and these problems can cause some readers
to perceive errors in the text when the error
is actually in the translation.
Thus, the perceived error does not exist in
the ìoriginalî version of the Bible, the
apologist will argue, but only in the translations.
However, apologists seem to forget that unique
idioms, archaic terminology, puns, euphemisms
and other forms of speech are present in all
human literature.
They are markers which place such literature
firmly in the time and culture out of which
they were produced.
Apologists cannot explain how the presence
of such unique but confusing speech argues
for a divinely inspired document meant to
transcend such limiting use of language.
Clearer language is certainly something one
would expect from an omniscient, omnipotent
being.
Apologists cannot seem to explain why, if
a god is responsible for inspiring his divine
intentions clearly into Hebrew, Aramaic and
Greek, he is not also capable of inspiring
equal clarity into translations of English,
Spanish and Chinese other than to assert it
somehow causes logistical problems for the
deity.
Are translators somehow closed to divine inspiration
whereas the original authors were not?
Nearly all apologists acknowledge that current
copies of the Bible contain errors, even if
that acknowledgement is only for the minor
copyist errors that exist in the texts.
For example, in 2 Chronicles 9:25 the author
states Solomon had four thousand stalls for
horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen
which seems to contradict 1 Kings 4:26 which
states Solomon had forty thousand stalls of
horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand
horsemen.
Which is correct?
Apologists will claim that the ORIGINAL manuscripts
only had one number, probably the FOUR thousand
figure, and the apparent contradiction introduced
by 1 Kings 4:26 is merely a copyist slip of
the pen.
Is it possible the two verses did, at an earlier
time, agree?
Itís of course possible; and, moreso, itís
probable.
And if they did agree on the figure for the
number of Solomonís stalls, wouldnít a copyistís
error explain the contradiction?
It certainly would.
Certainly this is the actual reason why we
find these sorts of errors in the Bible and
in most other works of ancient literature.
Before the creation of the printing press,
copies of ancient documents were done by hand
by very fallible human beings.
Monks, sitting in damp quarters lit only by
natural light or candles, put quill to parchment
while looking back and forth between original
scroll and the copy they were producing.
Clearly minor errors like the number of horse
stalls Solomon kept could easily creep in
from even the best and most attentive copyist.
They were only human, after all, and given
the number of centuries that separate the
original versions of these books and the most
recent copies, itís virtually guaranteed
that such errors would enter the text.
But this isnít just any ancient manuscript.
This is not even one of Homerís epics, or
an account of the deeds of Alexander the Great.
This is a book, originally authored by a powerful,
careful, painstaking God who took the trouble
to inspire his words perfectly when first
written, according to the apologists.
However, this God then, by the very fact that
such errors exist, must have suddenly went
inattentive and allowed these originally perfectly
inspired words to diverge into contradiction
in the copies.
But why?
Apologists complain that if God were to inspire
every copy of his Bible to be as inerrant
as the original he would be turned into a
micromanager.
This complaint doesnít travel far because,
among other things, it assumes micromanaging
the inerrant copying of the worldís most
important and only divinely inspired book
is somehow a waste of GodísÖtime.
That, in order to have as perfect copies as
the original, God would need to work miracles.
The apologistsí complaint ignores the fact
that God ñaccording to the assertionóthought
it important enough to intervene in human
history and the lives of certain human beings
to have his book produced but then assumes
the maintenance of its reproduction was somehow
less important.
If it was not defiling the will of the original
human authors to have them write the exact
words God intended, why is it violating a
copyistís will to have him pay strict attention
to the reproduction of this most sacred text?
Indeed, a simple error which found its way
into an early printing of the Bible was quickly
discovered by non-omniscient humans and corrected
by them.
The so-called ìImmoral Bibleî was published
in the 16th century with Exodus 20:14 reading,
ìThou SHALT commit adultery,î leaving out
the ìnotî!
If humans catch and correct such errors of
transmission, why not God?
While some apologists acknowledge these copyist
errors in the biblical text but claim that
they are minor and unimportant to the overall
message of the Scriptures.
They point out that while copyists may have
confused the number of stalls Solomon may
have had, they did not confuse the much greater
message being communicated through such stories.
Indeed, the apologists will boast that only
by a supernatural act could God have preserved
this message of Scripture through the centuries
and this consistent message is proof that
God divinely inspired the biblical texts.
Such apologists who so readily claim Godís
miraculous intervention in preserving the
message of the Bible are the same apologists
who claim it would have been an act of coercion,
or micromanagement, for God to have miraculously
intervened to keep the very words of Scripture
inerrant.
Apologists are often found wanting to not
only have their cake, but eat it, too.
Apologists may state that having inerrant
translations of the Bible into every known
language of the world would be logistically
impossible for mankind to handle.
And yet, the Bible today is the most widely
translated book in human history.
Without a doubt allowances by the translators
are made for the wide variety of languages
and cultures in which these bibles are produced
but nearly everyone has opportunity to read
the Bible in their own native tongue.
So far, the logistics involved in producing
the Bible into all these languages has not
been a problem for humankind so assuring inerrancy
in these translations surely shouldnít be
a problem for an omnipotent God.
Error or inerrancy can exist in any language.
The stories of the Bible are the same no matter
what a person's worldview or assumptions.
Either the walls of Jericho fell to Joshuaís
trumpets or they did not.
The story is either historically inerrant
or it is not.
The story's inerrancy does not rely upon a
person's language.
However and again, some apologists view inerrant
Bibles appearing in every language, in every
corner of the world as an act of coercion.
They envision God manipulating the hands of
every scribe copying every version of the
Bible, interfering with printing presses to
assure an inerrant delivery.
But the reproduction of the text to reflect
exactly the words God wanted would no more
be an act of coercion than was the original
inspiration of the text.
If God was careful enough to assure the inerrant
delivery of his original texts, there is no
logical (or logistical) reason why he could
not do the same with the copies.
Some apologists want to redefine what an error
is by stating that what may be considered
an error in the mind of a 21st century reader
of the biblical text may not have been an
error in the mind of the original author.
We should judge the inerrancy of the Bible
by the standards of those who wrote it.
For example:
In the 11th Chapter of Leviticus, verses 13
and 19 we read of a very odd classification
of animals.
Odd, of course, to 21st century ears:
And these are they which ye shall have in
abomination among the fowls...and the stork,
the heron after her kind, and the lapwing,
and the bat.
The modern reader will immediately recognize
the apparent error: Bats are not birds!
However, in this verse, bats are included
not in a modern biological classification
system, but in an ancient one.
For the biblical authors, bats and birds were
classified together as ìwinged animals.î
The Hebrew word translated ìfowlî in the
King James Version of this verse is owph.
In more modern translations, the word is rendered
ìbird.î The ancient Hebrews did not classify
animals the way modern biologists do; there
was no classification for mammals and so the
bat merely belonged to the group of animals
with wings.
While the modern classification system may
be a more scientifically accurate way to group
animals, grouping together animals because
they have winged appendages isnít necessarily
an ìerror.î
However, an ancient classification system
which lumps bats together with birds, clearly
is reflective of human invention, not divine.
These sorts of markers are the fingerprints
of human authors, exactly what one would expect
if the text was not of divine origin.
While such writing might not necessarily be
in error, it certainly reflects its very human
authorship.
Some apologists lay blame for biblical errors
at the feet of the Bible's critics.
They acknowledge that the Bible isn't perfect,
but it isn't perfect insofar as it obviously
wasn't written with a modern audience in mind.
Skeptics raising objections to the claim of
biblical inerrancy are sometimes labeled fundamentalist
atheists who simply donít know how read the
Bible properly.
Apologists will insist that God inspired the
authors of the biblical books but that doesn't
mean God inspired the writings so that they
would be understood by everyone.
These so-called errors in the Bible highlighted
by skeptics are created by a misunderstanding
of the Bible; of not reading it properly.
The question is then raised, who CAN understand
the Bible?
The apologist will answer, of course, that
they understand the Bible best and offer their
services in guiding readers through the difficult
passages of the Bible.
Never mind that apologists often disagree
amongst themselves on the best paths through
these treacherous pages!
Despite the apologistís self-serving function
of accusing critics of the Bible of not understanding
it in its proper contexts, the Bible is indeed
a product of its own age and as such is difficult
to understand.
It must be approached in its own contexts:
literary, historical, cultural and so on.
Of course this is as true for the Bible as
it is for any other work of ancient literature
so itís difficult to understand how an acknowledgement
of these contexts does not undermine the assertion
of divine authorship.
The Bible isn't easy to understand precisely
because it wasn't the product of a supernatural
being.
The Bible is difficult to understand for the
same reasons most ancient literature is difficult
to understand.
It is the product not of a god but of human
beings.
A product of human beings not inspired to
write the thoughts of a divine entity but
inspired by their own imaginations, inspired
by the peculiarities of their own times and
cultures, written within the confines and
structures of their own worlds, separated
from modern readers by thousands of years.
For example, the ancient Near Eastern authors
of the biblical text did not possess the concept
of a world created from nothingness.
They did not possess concepts of quantum physics
or string theory.
They invented stories from their immediate
surroundings, circumstances and experiences.
Theirs was a world of finite resources, struggle,
nature and chaos.
In the creation story of Genesis 1, the author
did not, could not, imagine his god magically
conjuring a planet ñmuch less an entire universeófrom
nothing.
Instead, formless water pre-exists everything.
It was from this watery chaos that God moved
and brought order, and from this water the
earth arose.
In turn, from the earth, God formed the world
familiar to the Genesis author.
In this story, God is more a manager, less
an artist.
Linear, logical, abstract ideas which permeate
our Western world did not exist for the ancient
authors writing the biblical narratives.
Additionally, from the overall structure of
Genesis 1, it is clear that this story is
giving an explanation for the Jewish institution
of the Sabbath.
The authors, already aware that their religion
dictated rest on the seventh day of the week,
crafted a creation story to explain, in part,
where this practice originated.
Many such origin stories, known as etiologies,
exist in a variety of ancient literature.
Study of the cultural and historical contexts
from which these stories arose helps bring
these facts into focus.
But this is precisely true of any ancient
literature.
The Bible certainly is not unique.
And that is the point.
For many, a deeper understanding of not just
the biblical texts but discoveries of history
and modern science actually lead them away
from belief in the Bible as the inerrant word
of God.
How is understanding the opening chapter of
Genesis as depicting God as an administrator
of chaos in the context of ancient Near Eastern
mythology, or as an etiological story regarding
the institution of the Jewish Sabbath day,
rather than a historical account of creation
supportive of biblical inerrancy?
Understanding the character of god or the
institution of a religious practice in this
historical context does not make the creation
story of Genesis any more accurate.
But if Genesis was never intended to give
an accurate description of creation, and was
merely meant to describe what the authors
believed about their god and why no one in
their culture was supposed to work on the
seventh day of the week, how is that any more
evidence of ìinspirationî or ìinfallibilityî
than a contextual understanding of the Egyptian
creation myth, or the Babylonian?
An apologist may object that if copies of
the Bible were maintained as inerrant as the
original, such copies would become the focus
of worship.
This would then take focus away from worshipping
the true creator and turn human beings into
idolaters, worshipping a book instead of God.
However, such an apologist does not explain
how inerrant originals did not create this
idolatry so it is unclear how inerrant copies
would.
An apologist making such a claim may draw
a parallel between inerrant copies of the
Bible and some other highly revered historical
document.
The original United States Declaration of
Independence is just such a document.
It is painstakingly preserved, held on display
at the National Archives Rotunda in Washington,
D.C., in encasements made of titanium and
aluminum, filled with inert argon gas.
Long lines wait to view the Declaration with
patrons passing through metal detectors and
under the watchful eyes of armed security
guards and electronic cameras.
The Declaration is indeed held apart from
many other works of literature available in
the United States and doubtless an original
Bible, should it ever have existed, would
be similarly treated.
More to the apologistís point, however, even
exact copies of the Declaration, made around
the time of the original, are held in high
regard.
These rare copies are found in various collections,
meticulously preserved, highly prized and
carefully guarded.
Occasionally these exact, some might say inerrant,
copies of the original Declaration go on public
tour.
These tours are an example of modern security
practices.
Metal detectors, armed guards, special viewing
containers and electronic surveillance are
in abundance at these displays.
The apologist will claim that this reverence
for even a copy of the Declaration is what
is feared would follow exact, inerrant copies
of the Bible.
The attention is drawn to the document instead
of the author and misguided reverence is exactly
what God wants to avoid and so he allows errors
to mar his otherwise perfect text.
However, what the apologist fails to realize
in this extravagant, imaginative scenario
which he invents erupting around inerrant
copies of the Bible, is that such caution
is taken with the Declaration of Independence
and its few surviving contemporary copies
not because they are inerrant, but because
they are rare.
The reason the Declaration of Independence
on display at the National Archives is preserved
and protected by such extraordinary measures
is because it IS the original Declaration
of Independence!
Doubtless an original Bible would be held
somewhere similar ñperhaps in the Vaticanóunder
similar cautionary measures.
And why not?
The original Bible would be rare, indeed!
The reason the few copies of the Declaration
are similarly held in high regard is because
only a relatively few exist.
If only a few inerrant copies of the Bible
existed, they too would likely be highly prized.
However, anyone with access to a computer
can read the Declaration, word for word, copied
exactly from the original without copyist
error or translation difficulties, from the
National Archives website.
Users can download an exact, inerrant copy
of the Declaration of Independence from a
multitude of sites, or purchase a precise
duplicate from many retail stores.
All of these exact, inerrant copies of the
Declaration of Independence have not caused
a frenzy of attention over their existence.
There are not throngs of security-checked
patrons lining up to get their error-free
copy of the Declaration at local bookstores.
Purchasers online do not have their personal
information cross referenced by the Department
of Homeland Security when downloading an inerrant
copy.
While the original Declaration of Independence
can be said to be revered, almost to the point
of worship, by many Americans, the same cannot
be said of these exact copies printed from
PDF files on cheap computer paper.
And the same would be true of inerrant copies
of the Bible.
The focus would not be on the fact that there
were copies of an inerrant Bible, but on the
fact of the inerrancy itself.
In other words, having a copy of an inerrant
Bible would not cause anyone any surprise.
It would be the inerrancy itself, sustained
through centuries of copying, which would
be astonishing.
But, isnít that what the apologists already
claim about the Bible?
That it IS already inerrantÖonce the supposed
errors are explained away through apologetics.
The only thing which could have maintained
inerrancy in the Bible from the originals
down through all the copies would have been
divine intervention.
But apologists already claim divine intervention
in the originals so why would divine intervention
in the copies be any greater a problem?
Inerrancy in the copies would simply support
the apologists claim of divine inspiration
and biblical inerrancy!
The only thing truly inerrant copies of the
Bible would do is perhaps put apologists out
of a job!
The fact that numerous errors exist in the
Bible ñeven simple ones caused by copyistsóis
evidence that even if inerrancy existed in
the original Bible, it was not maintained
in the subsequent copies.
And this is to be expected of a Bible not
under the stewardship of an omnipotent being,
but is evidence, instead, of the very human
production and reproduction of the biblical
texts.
Most apologists insist that the Bible was
inspired by God.
But some acknowledge that it was written by
fallible human beings and assert these human
authors are the ones responsible for introducing
error into the text simply because they were
human.
In other words, when men wrote the Bible,
they included historical and scientific error
because they simply did not have the knowledge
we have today.
God is not responsible for this sort of error.
For instance, the author of Isaiah was like
many other ancient people of his age, sharing
belief in the world as a flat, disc-shaped
object.
This author had no idea the earth was a sphere
and so when he wrote Isaiah 40:22,
It is he who sits above the circle of the
earth, and its inhabitants are like grasshoppers;
who stretches out the heavens like a curtain,
and spreads them like a tent to live in;
it was under this erroneous impression that
the earth was flat.
Nonetheless, the author of Isaiah was writing
under the inspiration of God, writing of Godís
magnificence and awesome power.
God was not inspiring the author to write
scientifically accurate prose, but merely
was the inspiration for the writing itself.
In a similar manner, a man may write a poem,
inspired by the love he feels for a woman.
While the woman and his love for her inspired
his writing, the writing itself belongs solely
to the man.
If this is true of the Bible, the very words
of Scripture can no longer be considered divinely
inspired and the doctrine of inerrancy is
irretrievably lost.
Clearly, passages like Isaiah 40:22 which
describe the earth as a circle, a flat, disc-shaped
object, are in error scientifically.
Few supporters of the Bibleís divine inspiration
would say that God inspired the author of
Isaiah to write a scientifically inaccurate
description of the earth.
However, such supporters may agree that Isaiahís
love and respect for God inspired him to write
this passage, in the context of the scientific
naivety of his day, merely in order to express
this love and respect.
What is important is the love and respect,
not the descriptions of the earth as a circle
or the sky as a tent.
The question is raised, then, of how this
makes the Bible any different from any other
inspired literature, like a poem written from
a manís love for a woman.
Such inspiration may indeed explain some of
the errors in the Bible but it does nothing
to evidence the Bibleís inerrancy or the
existence of God.
God neednít exist in order to explain someoneís
inspiration caused by BELIEF in god.
The Bible, then, is no different from any
other religiously inspired literature.
And if error is merely a product of the authorís
time, Jesus is recorded as having made certain
errors himself.
In Matthew 19, Jesus refers both to Adam and
Eve as well as to Moses as if these were historical
persons.
The science of biological evolution negates
the statement Jesus made that God created
human beings, male and female, ìat the beginning,î
just as science negates the statement in Isaiah
that the earth is a circle.
Also, since there is no historical reference
to the exodus outside of the Bible, and centuries
of archaeological research has failed to turn
up evidence of the Hebrewís massive escape
from bondage in Egypt, Moses was, in all likelihood,
merely a legendary figure.
If such errors in the Bible are the result
of human fallibility, then were these errors
by Jesus due to his own scientific and historical
ignorance?
But as Jesus is believed to have been God
incarnate, few evangelical apologists take
this approach.
More conservative apologists use a variation
of this theme.
While they also acknowledge that men wrote
the Bible, they still maintain that it was
through direct inspiration of God.
However, God had to work through these men
who were typically fallible and bound by their
own time and cultures.
So, passages like Isaiah which give an inaccurate
description of the earth were indeed inspired
by God directly to reveal his magnificence
and sovereignty over creation, but the inaccuracy
itself was a by-product of having this writing
done through human beings.
In other words, God could not, or would not,
over-ride human fallibility and so errors
of scientific and historical fact were unfortunately,
and unavoidably, woven into the text.
How such limitations could have bound an omnipotent
beingís hand is rarely discussed.
When it is, apologists prefer to weakly assert
that God simply did not wish to coerce the
writers into writing exactly what he wanted,
but settled for a close approximation.
How this argues for divine inspiration or
inerrancy, however, is lost.
The Bible, with such human fallibilities woven
into the text, looks exactly like literature
written exclusively by human beings.
Some apologists will try to rescue the inerrancy
of the bible by referring to a symbolic or
metaphoric interpretation of certain, troublesome
passages.
For example, the Genesis 1 story of creation
is obviously at odds with the discoveries
of modern science.
Some apologists will abandon a literal reading
of the chapter in favor of one that, admittedly,
is probably more faithful to the original
context of the tale.
These apologists will note that the author
of Genesis 1 was not writing a scientific
textbook on the origins of the universe, but
was instead authoring a polemic against neighboring
ancient Near Eastern polytheistic mythologies
which competed with the strict monotheism
of the Yahwehist cult.
These apologists will stress that the creation
story of Genesis was written poetically, and,
as 1 century Christian apologist and theologian
Augustine asserted, ìNo Christian will dare
say that the narrative must not be taken in
a figurative senseÖî
The error with this sort of apologetic is
that it settles on ONE type of literature
that these passages may demonstrate while
ignoring other types of literature into which
these biblical stories may fall.
For the apologist defending the creation story
of Genesis 1, it is obvious how stressing
the poetic nature of the writing can help
deflect criticism of the tale if it is read
literally.
In light of modern scientific discoveries,
the creation story of Genesis 1 is absurd.
However, to simply conclude the entire chapter
is poetry, noting that Genesis 1 contains
certain poetic structures, is jumping too
hastily to a desired but erroneous conclusion.
While some passages of the Bible are clearly
metaphors, meant to be read figuratively,
they nonetheless give clues about the Hebrew
worldview, which is frequently not a worldview
consistent with modern views and certainly
not a worldview one would expect from an omniscient
God.
Genesis 1, while containing metaphor and symbolism,
still contains elements of ancient Hebrew
cosmology which is scientifically inaccurate.
Genesis 1 is an ancient cosmology, attempting
to explain the origin of the sky, the earth,
plants, animals and heavenly bodies; in this
sense it is an origins myth.
An apologist may try to divert attention away
from the chapterís scientific errors by claiming
the story was not intended to be read as proto-science,
but nonetheless, Hebrew proto-scientific ideas
are embedded in the text.
This simply cannot be glossed over by claiming
Genesis is poetry.
The imagery used in the poem of Genesis 1
is still the imagery of a scientifically ignorant
ancient culture and not what one would expect
to have been inspired by an omniscient God.
Certainly, if the text was divinely inspired,
this deity could have coated its message in
a more accurate cosmology, satisfying both
ancient and modern audiences, providing evidence
of the supernatural origin of the narrative.
As it stands, the text has all the appearances
of having originated in the scientifically
ignorant mind of an all-too fallible human
author without benefit of divine aid.
Genesis 1 is also a narrative, with characters,
tension, plot and conclusion.
It serves as religious propaganda carefully
designed to stand in opposition to other ancient
Near Eastern creation stories and legitimize
Hebrew religious, political, and social values.
The author of Genesis 1 has taken an older,
rival mythology from Mesopotamia, and has
recast it in a Yahweist mold.
Fragments of this older Mesopotamian myth
can be found in other books of the Bible including
Psalms, Job, and Isaiah.
And, if Genesis 1 was originally meant merely
as metaphor and not to be taken at all literally
by anyone who read the narrative, was this
important insight missed by the author of
Exodus?
Exodus 20:11,
For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that in them is, and rested
the seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed
the sabbath day, and hallowed it.
It would seem this author wasnít aware of
modern apologetics which steer away from a
literal reading of Genesis 1.
Many apologists using this technique however
fail to apply this symbolic or metaphoric
reading to passages which hit much closer
to home, especially for the Christian.
The empty tomb, for example, may not have
been a historical reality, but a figurative
answer to critics of the early Christian movement
regarding the reality of Jesusí resurrection.
Itís a rare apologist who explores to possibility
of the New Testament gospel stories of the
empty tomb as potential metaphor.
And when they do respond, they are as foaming
at the mouth fundamentalist about the literalism
of the empty tomb as any creationist is about
the historicity of Genesis 1.
In the end, referring to the Bible's symbolic
or metaphoric meanings does nothing to elevate
it to that of a divinely inspired text any
more than any other ancient OR modern metaphoric
literature can be considered divine based
on a figurative reading.
It certainly does nothing to argue for infallibility,
either, at least not objectively, as the apologist
can assign almost whatever meaning they wish
to a figurative text and claim this is what
was originally intended.
The creation story of Genesis 1 for example,
an ancient Hebrew monotheistic cosmology,
can be interpreted symbolically to support
any number of ideas, including a reference
to the Christian trinity: with God, the father,
as the center of the story, the creator, Jesus,
the son, as the Word through which everything
was brought into existence, and the Holy Spirit,
that which hovered over the primordial waters.
For the apologist, deciding which biblical
passages are figurative and which are literal
is a highly subjective, and individualistic,
exercise.
Some apologists will claim that reading and
understanding the Bible cannot be done alone.
Reading the Bible properly requires reading
it with the assistance of the Holy Spirit.
As part of the trinity, the Holy Spirit is
that manifestation of God which some Christians
claim helps to illuminate their minds as they
read the Bible.
The Holy Spirit leads readers to the Bibleís
truth.
In the same way that the Holy Spirit inspired
the writing of the Bible by working through
the minds of the authors who wrote it, the
Holy Spirit works through a readerís careful
study of the Scriptures.
As God spoke directly to the hearts of those
writing the Bible, through the Holy Spirit
he speaks to the hearts of those reading it.
This all sounds good to those who already
believe, but what does it really mean?
How can one test whether or not they are reading
the Bible with the Holy Spirit?
How does reading the Bible with the Holy Spirit
independently support biblical inerrancy?
The Bible, so the claim goes, was already
divinely inspired during its production.
Apparently this wasnít sufficient enough
to get the message through and so the book
must be read with the authorís help.
If the Spirit had done such a poor job inspiring
the original manuscripts to be free from scientific
and historical error and clear enough that
most people could read the Bible plainly,
what confidence is there that the Spirit can
do any better of a job inspiring understanding
of the cumbersome, defective text for individual
readers today?
Itís a proposal thatís virtually irrelevant
to anyone who hasnít already decided the
Bible is inerrant.
Not to mention the circularity of stating
that the truth of the Bible is hidden from
those who donít believe in the truth of the
Bible but not from those who believe in that
truth.
And, thereís the fact that different people
claiming to have read the Bible under direction
of the Holy Spirit come to different conclusions
about the parts that cause doubt about inerrancy
in the first place.
Does one know theyíve properly read the Bible
with the Holy Spirit if they understand the
days of the creation story in Genesis 1 refer
to literal 24 hour periods or if they understand
the days of the creation story to be eras
of indeterminate length?
Does one know theyíve properly read the Bible
with the Holy Spirit if they understand Noahís
flood was merely a local affair or if they
understand Noahís flood was global?
Referring to the Holy Spirit as a guide which
dissolves problems found in the biblical text
is a useless suggestion for supporting the
claim of inerrancy.
Errors exist in the Bible.
This fact is undeniable, even for the apologist.
But, a number of apologists will argue, while
the Bible does contain error, these errors
do not obstruct Godís inspired truth from
coming through the pages of Scripture.
In other words, the Bible as we have it today
may not be a perfect re-creation of the original,
inerrant scripts, but it is sufficiently accurate
enough for readers to understand Godís meaning.
But what meaning is that?
When Jesus was asked in the New Testament
gospel of Matthew what he considered the greatest
commandment he answered,
ìYou shall love the Lord your God with all
your heart, and with all your soul, and with
all your mind.
This is the greatest and first commandment.
And a second is like it: You shall love your
neighbor as yourself.
On these two commandments hang all the law
and the prophets.î
The Law and the Prophets referred to in the
passage from Matthew are the Jewish scriptures
as they existed in the 1st century CE.
So, if we are to trust what Jesus said was
the inspired core message of the Bible, it
was merely to love God and each other.
Do we really need 66 books to tell us that?
It seems a terrible waste of time, energy,
paper, ink and space.
If the Bible is to be sifted through merely
for this sufficient message, what use is the
remaining material?
Itís very difficult to imagine why, in addition
to the brief, inspired truth of Matthew 22,
God needed to include a story about a man
sacrificing his daughter to Yahweh after a
rash vow.
How does that story contribute to Godís inspired
truth?
Or does it?
Why include the story of Elishaís calling
down a curse upon a group of little boys?
Or the number of stalls in Solomonís stables?
Or God coming to kill Moses for not cutting
off his sonís foreskin?
What do these superfluous anecdotes do to
further Godís inspired truth?
And if they donít, why are they in the Bible?
They seem more like stumbling blocks rather
than stepping stones to this ultimate message.
But perhaps the inspired truth of the Bible
is a bit more than what Jesus said.
Perhaps the inspired truth is more like what
is recorded in Romans 5:18,
Therefore just as one manís trespass led
to condemnation for all, so one manís act
of righteousness leads to justification and
life for all.
This is the Christian message of salvation,
anchored in the belief that sin entered the
world with Adamís disobedience in the book
of Genesis.
While minor errors or problems in the text
may not be too large of a distraction for
the message of this inspired truth to come
through the text, historical and scientific
errors of the Bible are a considerable drain
on its sufficiency.
If the authors of the Bible could not accurately
describe the nature of the sky, or the shape
of the earth, how are readers to trust what
these authors had to say about how one manís
trespass led to the condemnation of all?
If the authors of the Bible were wrong in
their description of the fall of Jericho,
or about a prophecy concerning Egypt, how
are readers to trust what they say about one
manís act of righteousness leading to justification
and life for all?
If there is no truth to the story of a worldwide
flood, what confidence is built about there
being inspired truth elsewhere?
And if modern biological science is right,
and humanity as a species arose from common
ancestry, what room is there for the Genesis
story of human creation, the trespass of one
man leading to the condemnation of all, and
the necessity for another manís righteousness
to lead to justification and life for all?
Or, perhaps we just uncovered the motivation
for apologetics.
The Bible IS difficult to understand.
It is at times unclear, contradictory and
prone to both scientific and historical error.
A tremendous amount of dedicated and focused
study of ancient customs, cultures and beliefs
is absolutely required if one is to understand
the Bible on its own terms and that is exactly
what is to be expected if the Bible is the
work of numerous authors and editors working
with various religious and political agendas
over centuries of time; a product of a collection
of books, all in turn products of their own
times and places.
The Bible we encounter free of the manipulative
tethers of the apologist is the exact opposite
of the Bible these same apologists claim it
to be.
Some may object, ìWhy canít the Bible be
both the inspired Word of God AND a product
of its own time and place?
The answer, of course, is embedded in the
assertion that the words of the Bible were
of such critical importance that they needed
to be crafted and woven into the text by an
omniscient deity.
Remember what the believers have asserted
regarding the inspiration of the Bible: that
the authors working under Godís direction
were ìconsigned to writing everything and
only those things which He wanted.î God is
not confined to a culture or a time, according
to those who believe in him.
He is timeless, existing everywhere.
Thus, the expectation is set that such a god
would inspire his collection of books with
words accessible to everyone, regardless of
place and time.
Apologists may scoff at this idea but they
do so only because they realize the Bible
simply does not fulfill this expectation.
Apologists provide excuses, not explanations,
for why their god did not successfully create
a book ña manual, for all humankindówhich
everyone, everywhere could understand easily.
The apologists will say inspiring such a Bible
would have amounted to nothing more than coercion
on the part of God, not allowing humankind
to freely choose whether or not to accept
the Bible as Godís Word.
But they fail to explain why they do not consider
the originals to have been a form of coercion
for those who first heard or read them.
The people who wrote the first editions of
the biblical books surely did not need instruction
in the language in which the Bible was written.
They didnít need lessons in cultural anthropology
to understand the context of their own society.
They didnít need anyone to explain strange
idioms or sly euphemisms found in the text.
If an inerrant and clear biblical text amounts
to coercion, why did God allow coercion of
this first audience but none thereafter?
Or the apologist may argue that the Bible
could not possibly have been written for all
humanity to understand.
Doing so would be logistically impossible.
It would amount to everyone having their own
private version of the Bible.
But, again, why is this so?
The complaint seems to be that God is limited
in his power to inspire a book that could
be read and understood by virtually everyone.
This is the same god, so the apologists claim,
who created the universe, who breathed life
into the first man, who flooded the entire
world, who rescued millions from captivity
in Egypt with great miracles and who came
to earth in the form of a man, died on a cross
and then came back to life three days later
to save humankind from ultimate destruction.
Yes, THAT god.
It is THAT god whom the apologists suddenly
claim would not be able to inspire the kind
of text which would be accessible to all people.
It was mentioned that some advocates for Godís
existence and the divine authorship of the
Bible think that expectations cannot be brought
to a reading of the Bible.
Bringing expectations puts human constraints
on God and that simply cannot be done with
an omnipotent, omniscient being.
However, these same apologists also say that
God cannot, or will not, produce an error
free and clear copy of his inspired text and
claim to know why.
The apologists fetter their god with all sorts
of limitations saying he cannot be expected
to do this thing or another to assure true
inerrancy and clarity of the biblical text.
God was forced to work within restraints.
Apologists find the Bible the way everyone
else finds it: full of scientific and historical
errors, contradictions, and discrepancies.
But because the apologist comes to the Bible
with a preloaded belief in a God which inspired
the text, they then craft a God around these
scientific and historical errors, contradictions,
and discrepancies.
The god invented by the apologist is then
used to explain why such problems with the
text exist.
The claim is God is all-knowing; so why does
the Bible say the earth is a circle when even
a child today knows itís a sphere?
Because, the apologist will say, God inspires
the use of equivocal terms in the text to
accommodate the scientific ignorance of the
original authors.
The god crafted by the apologist could not
have inspired the use of a more accurate term,
or inspired his authorís scientific curiosity
to explore the true shape of the earth the
way the Greeks did.
Instead, the apologist claims God merely molded
his inspired word to the ignorance of the
authors he was using to write his text.
The apologists read Godís mind and explain
how and why he allowed the authors of his
book to write the way they did, even though
at times these inspired authors introduced
errors and unnecessary ambiguity into the
text.
But the apologists simply cannot have it both
ways.
Either the Bible can and should be approached
with certain expectations created by definitions
of the god that inspired the text and of the
text itself or it cannot, and the Bible must
be allowed to speak on its own very human
authored terms, including its errors, contradictions
and discrepancies.
Is the Bible inerrant?
No.
Was it ever inerrant?
No one knows nor will anyone likely ever know.
But one thing is for certain: The best way
to approach and read the Bible is by first
silencing the incessant, distractive voices
of the apologists.
Apologists approach the Bible in a very specific
way.
They come to the Bible with beliefs about
it they want validated and they will validate
those beliefs by any means necessary.
How do apologists obscure understanding the
Bible?
First, it cannot be understood properly if
it is burdened with the belief of infallibility.
Twisting the plain words of the Bible to make
it conform with the discoveries of modern
science, or by obscuring the simplest thoughts
of the biblical authors by turning them into
poetry or metaphor, is another way apologists
do violence and dishonor to the text of the
Bible.
Postulating something for which there is no
evidence or need is certain to be a waste
of time.
There is absolutely no evidence that the Bible
was divinely inspired, or is, or was, inerrant.
There is no need to postulate supernatural
reasons for why errors exist in the text--whether
a god allowed the use of phenomenological
language, inspired equivocal terms, let copyist
slips of the pen to enter the textówhen naturalistic
explanations ñwhich are successful in explaining
similar features in other works of literatureówork
quite well.
Driven by belief in the inerrancy of the Bible,
apologists forget that the authors and audience
of the early narratives were just people,
the same as anyone today, struggling to make
sense of the world and their part in it.
The proper way to understand the Bible is
to leave it in the space and time in which
it was composed.
It cannot be dragged from its original contexts
into a 21st century context.
Certainly, the Bible can speak to us in our
own day, whispering to us questions which
ran through our ancestors minds; questions
which still continue to puzzle us today.
But the answers the biblical authors composed
for these questions are not what are important.
Indeed, many of those answers were undeniably
wrong.
The universe did not take 6 days to form;
there was not a single man and woman in a
garden somewhere in the ancient Near East
who gave birth to all humanity; there was
no garden; there was no original sin; there
was no global flood, or mass exodus from Egypt
or conquest of Jericho and the list goes on.
What is important is to connect with the questions
the biblical authors asked.
Where did we come from?
How did we get here?
Why is there suffering?
How can we eliminate it?
What does our future hold?
These questions are what link todayís readers
with the Bible; the answers the Bible gives
are sometimes simply wrong but they give us
insight into the thoughts of those who came
before us.
We do not properly respect the biblical authors
if we assign them a secondary role in the
creation of the text.
The Bible exists as a bridge to another place
and time and we need to realize just how extraordinarily
fortunate we are to have it.